Weary consumers, already grappling with high prices, now face an added potential risk: stagflation.

Stagflation — an economic term used to describe a combination of rising inflation, slower economic growth and high unemployment — may be on the horizon, according to economists.

“The Trump White House tariff policy has certainly increased the risk of both higher inflation and lower growth,” said Brett House, professor of professional practice in economics at Columbia Business School.

The Trump administration’s tariff policies are fueling stagflation conditions, according to the latest CNBC Rapid Update, which averages forecasts from 14 economists.

“It’s a more pronounced risk than at any time over the past 40 years,” said Greg Daco, chief economist at EY Parthenon and vice president at the National Association for Business Economics.

Uncertainty is already showing up in consumer confidence, said Diane Swonk, chief economist at KPMG.

“We’re seeing that kind of whiff of stagflation, where people are less secure about their jobs and they’re more worried about inflation down the road,” Swonk said.

What would stagflation mean in today’s economy?
017755 01: Unidentified individuals line up with cans to buy gas at a Mobil gas station July 1979 in Suffolk County, NY. In 1977 oil prices went up to more than $20 a barrel in response to increased demand and OPEC's policy of limiting supply which caused long lines at gasoline stations, and for the first time in history gasoline prices exceeded $1 a gallon. (Photo by James Pozarik/Liaison)
Unidentified people line up with cans to buy gas at a Mobil gas station in Suffolk County, New York, in July 1979. In 1977 oil prices went up to more than $20 a barrel in response to increased demand and OPEC’s policy of limiting supply, which caused long lines at gas stations, and for the first time in history gasoline prices exceeded $1 a gallon.
Jim Pozarik | Hulton Archive | Getty Images
Stagflation was a major issue for the U.S. economy in the 1970s, when unemployment rates and inflation both rose as the country grappled with the costly Vietnam War and the loss of manufacturing jobs.

The 1970s-era stagflation is often associated with major oil price increases, leading to shortages and long lines at gas stations. However, some economists have argued it was actually monetary fluctuations that prompted stagflation.

The conditions prompted then Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker to implement a dramatic tightening of monetary policy in the late ’70s and ’80s known as the “Volcker shock.” While inflation did come down as the Fed pushed interest rates higher, the central bank’s moves also prompted a severe recession — often defined as two consecutive quarters of negative gross domestic product growth — and higher than 10% unemployment.

We are within months of 'flirting' with recession, says KPMG's Diane Swonkwatch now
VIDEO04:37
We are within months of ‘flirting’ with recession, says KPMG’s Diane Swonk
Stagflation would not happen in the same way today, according to Dan Skelly, head of Morgan Stanley Wealth Management market research.

The U.S. is no longer at the whim of foreign oil, Skelly said. Moreover, unions, which prompted wage price spirals back then, are no longer as big a portion of the private work force today, he said.

The uncertainty around tariffs may affect corporate and consumer confidence, which would prompt spending and investment to slow, Skelly said. The likelihood of the growth slowdown part of stagflation is fairly high, he said.

However, Skelly said Morgan Stanley expects to see more effects in the stock market through earnings than in the economy.

Many firms are revising their economic forecasts, including the possibility of a recession, as a result of Trump administration policies, according to a new survey by Chief Executive.

Stagflation is not necessarily accompanied by a formal recession; rather, it can be slowing or stagnant growth, House said.

KPMG’s current forecast expects a shallow recession, with inflation peaking at the end of the third quarter.

“It’s not even what we saw during the pandemic,” Swonk said of the inflation spike. But it would be enough for employment to slow and to prompt a mild bout of stagflation, she said.

Stagflation, if it happens, would be the “worst of both worlds,” with higher unemployment and costs, Daco said.

“That represents a significant hardship for many families and businesses across the country,” he said.

How can you prepare for stagflation?
A shopper peruses the array of vegetables at a grocery store.
Athvisions | E+ | Getty Images
Americans may be facing a challenging economic period, with slower income growth, reduced employment prospects, higher unemployment and higher prices making it more difficult to stretch household budgets, according to House.

To prepare for stagflation, consumers would need to take all the steps they would in a recession as well as the steps they would take when prices are rising, said Sarah Foster, economic analyst at Bankrate.

As tariffs are expected to drive prices up, consumers may be tempted to buy ahead, even big-ticket items such as cars, laptops, smartphones or even homes.

Before making any such purchases, it’s important to make sure it’s in your budget, Foster said.

“It is absolutely wise right now to buy something that you know could be impacted by tariffs that you’ve already been budgeting for,” Foster said.

Yet consumers should be careful when it comes to “panic buying,” she said, or spending money to save money.

More from Personal Finance:
Tariffs, trade war inflation may be ‘pretty ugly’ by summer
What advisors are telling clients after bond sell-off
How a trade war could impact the price of clothing

Instead of overstretching their budgets with purchases, consumers should prioritize paying down high-interest credit card debt and building up an emergency fund. Focusing on high-interest debt first can save money in the long run, and having an emergency fund provides a financial safety net.

Experts generally recommend having at least six months’ expenses set aside. While it can be difficult to sock away extra money amid higher prices, the good news is higher interest rates are still providing inflation-beating returns on cash through online high-yield savings accounts that are FDIC-insured, Foster said.

For those who have been keeping cash on the sidelines rather than investing, now is the time to start allocating toward equities and riskier assets, considering the recent market drop, Skelly said.

“Don’t do it all in one day, but start winding down some of that cash, now that values are more fair than they were a month or two ago,” Skelly said.

Investors who have reaped big profits may want to rebalance to more neutral positions now, he said.

Can the economic forecast change?
Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent, rear left, and Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick stand as President Donald Trump signs executive orders and proclamations in the Oval Office at the White House in Washington, April 9, 2025.
Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent, rear left, and Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick stand as President Donald Trump signs executive orders and proclamations in the Oval Office at the White House in Washington, April 9, 2025.
Nathan Howard | Reuters
There’s no guarantee stagflation will happen.

In 2022, one survey found 80% of economists said stagflation was a long-term risk.

But it was avoided at that time with a mix of strong economic growth, disinflation and a robust labor market encouraged by the Federal Reserve, Daco said.

Much of the risks popping up in today’s economic forecasts are the result of White House policies, economists say.

The Trump administration could reduce stagflation risks, Daco said, by reducing policy uncertainty, easing immigration restrictions that will reduce the labor supply, and not implementing tariffs on major trading partners.

House said the U.S. entered 2025 with a “well-performing economy,” which he said has been threatened by the Trump administration’s recent policy changes. It is up to the administration to unwind those policies and “prevent stagflation from occurring,” he said.

The White House did not respond to a request for comment from CNBC.
Retirees may feel they’re protecting their nest eggs by getting out of stocks entirely.
However, by doing so they’d increase their risk of outliving their savings during retirement, which may last decades, experts said.
Mature couple manages expenses and bills together at home
Lordhenrivoton | E+ | Getty Images
Retirees may think moving all their investments to cash and bonds — and out of stocks — protects their nest egg from risk.

They would be wrong, experts say.

Most, if not all, retirees need stocks — the growth engine of an investment portfolio — to ensure they don’t run out of money during a retirement that might last decades, experts said.

“It’s important for retirees to have some equities in their portfolio to increase the long-term returns,” said David Blanchett, head of retirement research for PGIM, an investment management arm of Prudential Financial.

Longevity is biggest financial risk
Longevity risk — the risk of outliving one’s savings — is the biggest financial danger for retirees, Blanchett said.

The average life span has increased from about 68 years in 1950 to to 78.4 in 2023, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. What’s more, the number of 100-year-olds in the U.S. is expected to quadruple over the next three decades, according to Pew Research Center.

Retirees may feel that shifting out of stocks — especially during bouts of volatility like the recent tariff-induced selloff — insulates their portfolio from risk.

Seeking safety amid market volatility: Strategies to keep your money safewatch now
VIDEO03:30
Seeking safety amid market volatility: Strategies to keep your money safe
They would be correct in one sense: cash and bonds are generally less volatile than stocks and therefore buffer retirees from short-term gyrations in the stock market.

Indeed, finance experts recommend dialing back stock exposure over time and boosting allocations to bonds and cash. The thinking is that investors don’t want to subject a huge chunk of their portfolio to steep losses if they need to access those funds in the short term.

Dialing back too much from stocks, however, poses a risk, too, experts said.

More from Personal Finance:
Cash may feel safe when stocks slide, but has risks
How a trade war could impact the price of clothing
Is now a good time to buy gold?

Retirees who pare their stock exposure back too much may have a harder time keeping up with inflation and they raise the risk of outliving their savings, Blanchett said.

Stocks have had a historical return of about 10% per year, outperforming bonds by about five percentage points, Blanchett said. Of course, this means that over the long term, investing in stocks has yielded higher returns compared to investing in bonds. 

“Retirement can last up to three decades or more, meaning your portfolio will still need to grow in order to support you,” wrote Judith Ward and Roger Young, certified financial planners at T. Rowe Price, an asset manager.

What’s a good stock allocation for retirees?
So, what’s a good number?

One rule of thumb is for investors to subtract their age from 110 or 120 to determine the percentage of their portfolio they should allocate to stocks, Blanchett said.

For example, a roughly 50/50 allocation to stocks and bonds would be a reasonable starting point for the typical 65-year-old, he said.

An investor in their 60s might hold 45% to 65% of their portfolio in stocks; 30% to 50% in bonds; and 0% to 10% in cash, Ward and Young of T. Rowe Price wrote.

Someone in their 70s and older might have 30% to 50% in stocks; 40% to 60% in bonds; and 0% to 20% in cash, they said.

Why your stock allocation may differ
However, every investor is different, Blanchett said. They have different abilities to take risk, he said.

For example, investors who’ve saved too much money, or can fund their lifestyles with guaranteed income like pensions and Social Security — can choose to take less risk with their investment portfolios because they don’t need the long-term investment growth, Blanchett said.

Target date fundswatch now
VIDEO00:22
Target date funds
The less important consideration for investors is risk “appetite,” he said.

This is essentially their stomach for risk. A retiree who knows they’ll panic in a downturn should probably not have more than 50% to 60% in stocks, Blanchett said.

The more comfortable with volatility and the better-funded a retiree is, the more aggressive they can be, Blanchett said.

Other key considerations
There are a few other important considerations for retirees, experts said.

Diversification. Investing in “stocks” doesn’t mean putting all of one’s money in an individual stock like Nvidia or a few technology stocks, Blanchett said. Instead, investors would be well-suited by putting their money in a total market index fund that tracks the broad stock market, he said.
Bucketing. Retirees can do lasting damage to the longevity of their portfolio if they pull money from stocks that are declining in value, experts said. This risk is especially high in the first few years of retirement. It’s important for retirees to have separate buckets of bonds and cash they can pull from to get them through that time period as stocks recover.